What is menstruation? What is the menstrual cycle?
Menstruation is the process in which the uterus sheds blood and tissue through the vagina. This is a natural and healthy process for girls and women of reproductive age. In Western communities, this is often called “the period.” It typically lasts 2 to 5 days, but this varies by individual.

When a person begins to menstruate, this is called menarche. The age of menarche varies by individual.

Menstruation is part of the menstrual cycle – a cycle of biological changes that take place in a woman or girl’s reproductive system to prepare her body for a potential pregnancy. The changes are triggered by hormones, which are natural chemicals in the body. This cycle begins when a girl reaches puberty and continues until she reaches the end of her fertility (also known as menopause, at which time menstrual cycles end).

The menstrual cycle is roughly 28 days long, but it can be shorter or longer. It begins with menstruation (considered day 1 of the cycle). Menstruation is the shedding of the lining of the uterus and the remnants of the unfertilized egg. It continues with an increase in the hormone estrogen, and the lining of the uterus becomes thick and spongy again (typically days 6-8). An egg is released from one of the ovaries, called “ovulation” (around day 14, but this can vary), then the egg moves through the fallopian tube towards the uterus (typically day 15-24). If the egg is not fertilized, it will not be implanted in the uterine wall but instead fall apart, and hormone levels such as estrogen and progesterone, will drop. This process is followed by the start of a new cycle.

While a person’s menstrual cycles may be consistent – even predictable – they can also change or vary, particularly in the first few years after menarche. Some changes, such as absence of bleeding, signal a pregnancy. Other changes can be related to contraceptive use, stress, nutrition, physical activity or health concerns. Some cycle changes are just a natural part of ageing.


In Rajasthan, India, 15-year-old Priyanka Meena sleeps outside her home, in a space cordoned off by a sari, when she has her periods. She wears the same clothes and uses the same utensils when she menstruates; these are believed to be unclean and cannot be taken into the home, even after her period is over. © UNFPA India
How is menstruation related to human rights?
Human rights are rights that every human being has by virtue of his or her human dignity. Menstruation is intrinsically related to human dignity – when people cannot access safe bathing facilities and safe and effective means of managing their menstrual hygiene, they are not able to manage their menstruation with dignity. Menstruation-related teasing, exclusion and shame also undermine the principle of human dignity.

Gender inequality, extreme poverty, humanitarian crises and harmful traditions can all turn menstruation into a time of deprivation and stigma, which can undermine their enjoyment of fundamental human rights. This is true for women and girls, as well as for transgender men and nonbinary persons who menstruate.

Over the lifetime of a person who menstruates, they could easily spend three to eight years menstruating, during which they might face menstruation-related exclusion, neglect or discrimination.

A variety of factors affect how people are treated during menstruation (and other times when they experience vaginal bleeding, such as during post-partum recovery).

Exclusion from public life

One of these factors is the perception that menstruation is dirty or shameful. This view contributes to restrictions women and girls face during vaginal bleeding, which exist in many, if not most, countries. Some restrictions are cultural, such as prohibitions on handling food or entering religious spaces, or the requirement that women and girls isolate themselves. (See examples of menstruation taboos and discrimination here.) Some restrictions are self-imposed; women or girls may fear participating in activities like school, athletics or social gatherings. Together, these practices can reinforce the idea that women and girls have less claim to public spaces, and that they are less able to participate in public life.

Barriers to opportunities

Another common misconception is that women and girls have diminished capacities, whether physical or emotional, due to their menstrual cycles. These ideas can create barriers to opportunities, reinforcing gender inequality. In truth, most women and girls do not have their abilities hindered in any way by menstruation.

Barriers to sanitation and health

Poverty and humanitarian crises can limit women’s and girls’ access to culturally appropriate, high quality menstrual supplies and safe, private washing facilities.

Vulnerable women and girls in middle- and high-income countries can also face poor access to safe bathing facilities and menstrual supplies – including those in impoverished school systems, prisons and homeless shelters.

Heightened vulnerability

The onset of menstruation, called menarche, can undermine girls’ human rights. In many places around the world, menarche is believed to be an indication that girls are ready for marriage or sexual activity. This leaves girls vulnerable to a host of abuses, including child marriage and sexual violence.

Deeply impoverished girls have been known to engage in transactional sex to afford menstrual products.

Below is a list of universally agreed human rights that can be undermined by women’s and girls’ treatment during menstruation:

The right to health - Women and girls may experience negative health consequences when they lack the supplies and facilities to manage their menstrual health. Stigma associated with menstruation can also prevent women and girls from seeking treatment for menstruation-related disorders or pain, adversely affecting their enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and well-being.
The right to education - Lack of a safe place or ability to manage menstrual hygiene as well as lack of medication to treat menstruation-related pain can all contribute to higher rates of school absenteeism and poor educational outcomes. Some studies have confirmed that when girls are unable to adequately manage menstruation in school, their school attendance and performance suffer.
The right to work - Poor access to safe means of managing menstrual hygiene and lack of medication to treat menstruation-related disorders or pain also limit job opportunities for women and girls. They may refrain from taking certain jobs, or they may be forced to forgo working hours and wages. Menstruation-related needs, such as bathroom breaks, may be penalized, leading to unequal working conditions. And women and girls may face workplace discrimination related to menstruation taboos.
The right to non-discrimination and gender equality - Stigmas and norms related to menstruation can reinforce discriminatory practices. Menstruation-related barriers to school, work, health services and public activities also perpetuate gender inequalities.
The right to water and sanitation - Water and sanitation facilities, such as bathing facilities, that are private, safe and culturally acceptable, along with a sufficient, safe and affordable water supply are basic prerequisites for managing menstrual health management.
What do people need to manage their menstruation?
Health issues particular to women’s and girls’ bodies – including not only menstruation but also pregnancy, childbirth, post-partum changes and menopause – have often been overlooked by decision-makers, policymakers, educators and even medical establishment. As a result, women and girls often know little about the changes they will experience as they advance through life. Many girls learn about menstruation only when they reach puberty, which can be a frightening and confusing experience.

People of different gender diversities, as well, such as transgender men and nonbinary people, often face additional barriers to information and supplies to safely manage menstruation, including possible threats to their safety and well-being.

In the last few years, however, menstrual health and hygiene management have become topics of conversation among girls’ advocates, education experts, humanitarian professionals, human rights and global development specialists.

There is now wide agreement about what is required during menstruation:

- They must have safe access to clean material to absorb or collect menstrual blood, and these items must be acceptable to the individuals who need them.

- They must be able to change these materials in safety and privacy, and have a place to dispose of used menstrual supplies or to wash reusable supplies.

- Menstruating people must also be able to safely and privately wash with soap and water.

- They should have basic education about the menstrual cycle and how to manage menstruation without discomfort or fear.

- People who menstruate should also have access to health information and care, ensuring they are able to make informed choices about how to manage their menstruation, and enabling them to seek care if they experience menstruation-related disorders. 

Menstrual products must also be safe, effective and acceptable to the people who use them. These products may include: Disposable menstrual pads (also commonly called sanitary napkins or sanitary towels), reusable menstrual pads, tampons, menstrual cups, and clean, absorbent fabrics such as cloths or period underwear.

UNFPA distributes menstrual products to women and girls in humanitarian crises. The choice of product is often determined by cultural and logistical needs. For example, in some communities, women are not comfortable with insertable products such as tampons or menstrual cups. In humid or rainy conditions, reusable menstrual pads may be difficult to thoroughly dry, possibly contributing to infection risks. In other conditions, lack of waste management systems might make reusable products more desirable than disposable ones. 


"I end up using rags to absorb the blood flow,” said 20-year-old Nyanjuma Galoth, was living in a civilian protection camp in Juba, South Sudan. © UNFPA South Sudan/Juma Delu
What happens when menstruation cannot be managed properly?
Lack of access to the right menstrual products may lead to greater risk of infection. For example, some studies show that, in locations with high humidity, reusable pads may not dry thoroughly, possibly contributing to infection risks. Other products, such as menstrual cups, require sterilization and tampons require frequent changing, both of which may present challenges in conditions like humanitarian crises.

In some cases, women and girls do not have access to menstrual products at all. They may resort to rags, leaves, newspaper or other makeshift items to absorb or collect menstrual blood. They may also be prone to leaks, contributing to shame or embarrassment. 

One study has suggested that there may be an increased risk of urogenital infections, such as yeast infection, vaginosis or urinary tract infections, when women and girls are not able to bathe and/or change or clean their menstrual supplies regularly. However, there is no clear causal relationship, and urogenital infections are more often caused by internal, than external bacteria.

Women and girls living in extreme poverty and in humanitarian crises may be more likely to face these challenges. In one Syrian refugee community, for example, health workers reported seeing high levels of such vaginal infections, perhaps a result of poor menstrual hygiene management. However, there is no strong evidence about the risks and prevalence of such infections. 

Cultural expectations and beliefs can also play a role. Some traditions discourage menstruating people from touching or washing their genitals during menstruation, which might increase their vulnerability to infection and discomfort, and could affect their sense of dignity.

What are symptoms or disorders related to menstruation?
Menstruation is often different from person to person, and even one person can experience very different periods over their lifetime. This is often healthy and normal. But when menstruation prevents people from engaging in regular activities, medical attention is required. Unfortunately, lack of attention to, and education about, menstruation means that many women and girls suffer for years without receiving care. Below are some of the conditions and disorders related to menstruation.

One common menstruation-related complaint is dysmenorrhea, also known as menstrual cramps or painful periods. It often presents as pelvic, abdominal or back pain. In some cases, this pain can be debilitating. Studies show that dysmenorrhea is a major gynaecological issue among people around the world, contributing to absenteeism from school and work, as well as diminished quality of life. 

Sometimes, menstrual irregularities can indicate serious disorders. For example, some women and girls may experience abnormally heavy or prolonged bleeding, called menorrhagia, which could signal a hormonal imbalance or other concerns.

Excruciating pain or excessive bleeding during menstruation can also indicate reproductive problems such as endometriosis (when the uterine lining grows outside of the uterus) or fibroids (lumpy growths in the uterus).

Irregular, infrequent or prolonged periods can indicate disorders such as polycystic ovary syndrome.

Extremely heavy periods can also increase the risk of iron-deficiency anaemia, which can cause extreme fatigue, weakness, dizziness and other symptoms. Severe or chronic iron-deficiency anaemia can cause dangerous complications during pregnancy as well as physiological problems.

The hormonal changes associated with the menstrual cycle can also cause physical and emotional symptoms, ranging from soreness, headaches and muscle pain to anxiety and depression. These symptoms are sometimes considered premenstrual syndrome (PMS), but when severe or disabling they are sometimes considered premenstrual dysphoric disorder. 

There are also conditions that can exacerbate menstruation-related complaints. For example, studies show that female genital mutilation can cause longer and more painful periods.


On the last day of her period, Poonam, in India, burns her used pads to prevent animals from feeding on them, which is considered inauspicious. © UNFPA India
What is PMS and when does it occur?
Most people who menstruate experience some physical or emotional discomfort known as premenstrual syndrome (PMS) about a week before or during the first few days of their menstrual periods.

PMS manifests differently in different people and may vary between menstruation cycles. The most common symptoms during PMS include changes in appetite, backaches, acne, bloating, headaches, depression, feelings of sadness, tension or anxiety, irritability, sweating, tender breasts, water retention, constipation or diarrhea, trouble concentrating, insomnia and  tiredness. For some, these symptoms can be so severe that they miss work or school, while others are not bothered. 

On average, women in their 30s are most likely to have PMS. PMS may also increase as a person approaches menopause because of the fluctuations in hormone levels.

It is not really known why people experience PMS. Researchers believe it is because of the dramatic drop in estrogen and progesterone that takes place after ovulation when a woman is not pregnant. PMS symptoms often disappear when the hormone levels begin to rise again.

About half of women who need relief from PMS also have another health problem, such as depression or anxiety disorders, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, and bladder pain syndrome.

Stereotypes and stigma surrounding PMS can contribute to discrimination. For instance, people may assume that PMS affects all women, or that it undermines women’s competence in the school or workplace.

When does menstruation start? Is the onset of menstruation earlier today than it used to be?
The onset of menstruation, called menarche, varies from person to person. It commonly starts between the ages of 10 and 16. 

In rare cases, menarche can take place before a girl reaches age 7 or 8. Menarche can also be delayed or prevented due to malnutrition, excessive exercise or medical issues. 

It is hard to know the global average age of menarche, because recent and comparable data are hard to find. One study from 1998 found that 14 is a typical age of menarche.

Some studies have found that menarche is occurring earlier among girls in certain places, often in high-income countries and communities. Research from countries such as South Africa suggest these changes are related to nutrition and socio-economic status, meaning that as nutrition and health improve, girls’ bodies may mature slightly earlier. However, lack of systematically collected data from low-income countries means that broader or global conclusions cannot be made. 

Similarly, it is difficult to determine the average age at which menstruation ends, known as menopause. Data from 1999 suggest an average age of around 50.


Zainab, from Yemen, said, “I always used cotton cloths, folded them and placed them in my underwear. I came from an uneducated family so I did not know that there were menstrual pads used for this purpose.”
What are common myths and taboos about menstruation? How do they affect the status of women?
Menstrual taboos have existed, and still exist, in many or most cultures. Around the world and throughout history, misconceptions about menstruation have led to women’s and girls’ exclusion from all kinds of roles and settings – everything from leadership positions to space travel. Below is a non-exhaustive list of menstruation myths and taboos, as well as their impact on women and girls.

Myth: Menstruation is dirty or dangerous

Menstrual blood is composed of regular blood and tissue, with no special or dangerous properties. Yet throughout history, many communities have thought the mere presence of menstruating women could cause harm to plants, food and livestock. In the 1930s, Western scientists hypothesized that menstruating women’s bodies produced “menotoxins,” a kind of poison. 

People continue to hold similar beliefs today. Some communities believe women and girls can spread misfortune or impurity during menstruation (or other vaginal bleeding). As a result, they may face restrictions on their day-to-day behavior, including prohibitions on attending religious ceremonies, visiting religious spaces, handling food or sleeping in the home. 

In western Nepal, the tradition of chhaupadi prohibits women and girls from cooking food and compels them to spend the night outside the home, often in a hut or livestock shed. Similar rules apply to women and girls in parts of India and other countries. (In one rural community in Ethiopia, the taboos about vaginal bleeding led not only to women and girls being exiled from the home during menstruation, but also during childbirth and postpartum bleeding.) Isolation and expulsion from the home are often dangerous for women and girls – and can even be fatal. For example, women and girls in Nepal have been exposed to extreme cold, animal attacks or even sexual violence.

(It is important to note that not all aspects of these traditions are negative. In some places, limitations on women’s and girls’ activities give them an opportunity to return their maternal home to relax. See more here.)

Menstrual stigmas also affect how women and girls are able to manage their health and hygiene. Some cultures prohibit women and girls from touching or washing their genitals during menstruation, possibly contributing to infections. In some parts of Afghanistan, it is even believed that washing the body during menstruation can lead to infertility. In other places, women and girls are fearful that their bodies could pollute water sources or toilets. 

These beliefs also affect how women and girls dispose of menstrual products. In some places, women burn menstrual pads to avoid cursing animals or nature. In other places, burning menstrual products is believed to cause infertility. Some communities believe menstrual products should be buried to avoid attracting evil spirits. Others believe improper disposal of these products can cause a girl to menstruate continuously for life.

Myth: Certain foods are off-limits to menstruating women and girls

Many communities believe menstruating women and girls cannot eat certain foods, such as sour or cold foods, or those prone to spoilage. In fact, there are no medically recommended restrictions on the kinds of food menstruating people can or should eat, and dietary restrictions can actually put them at risk by limiting their nutrient intake.

Myth: Menstruation indicates readiness for marriage and sex

In many places around the world, a girl’s first period, called menarche, is believed to be a sign that she is ready for marriage, sexual activity and childbirth. This leaves girls vulnerable to a host of abuses, including child marriage, sexual violence or coercion, and early pregnancy. While menstruation is one indication of biological fertility, it does not mean girls have reached mental, emotional, psychological or physical maturity. In rare cases, menarche can take place before a girl reaches age 7 or 8, for example. And even older teens may not be mature enough to make informed choices about marriage, sexual activity or motherhood.

Myth: Menstruation limits women’s abilities

Menstruation is also commonly believed to limit women’s physical or mental abilities. Nineteenth century physicians, for example, believed that periods “render it extremely doubtful how far they can be considered responsible beings.” Similar ideas persist today. Women may face degrading comments about menstruation affecting their physical or emotional states. They may be excluded from certain roles or positions of leadership. 

Myth: Real women menstruate

Women can also face stigma and mistreatment for not having periods. Those who do not menstruate may be disparaged as “not real women.” Such perceptions contribute to some women’s reluctance to use contraceptive methods that affect their menstrual cycles.

These beliefs can adversely affect women who do not experience regular monthly menstruation, such as women who have irregular cycles and transgender women.

These ideas are also harmful to transgender men who menstruate. These men can face discrimination, limited access to menstruation products and poor access to safe, private washing facilities. 

Taboo: Menstruation should not be discussed publicly

Silence about menstruation can lead to ignorance and neglect, including at the policy level. This leaves women and girls vulnerable to things like period poverty and discrimination. It also adversely affects women and girls with heightened vulnerabilities. Those living with HIV can face stigma when seeking sanitation facilities, menstruation supplies and health care, for example. Those in prisons or other forms of detention may be deprived of menstruation supplies.

Myth: All women are moody when they menstruate

The menstrual cycle is driven by hormonal changes. These have different effects on different people. In some women, moodiness is a side-effect of these hormonal changes. Other women do not experience mood changes. 

Myth: Menstruation is a women’s issue only

While it is true that menstruation is experienced in the bodies of women and girls – as well as other individuals such as non-binary and trans persons – menstrual health issues are human rights issues, and therefore of importance to society as a whole. This means that men and boys must be involved in conversations about gender equality and promoting positive masculinities aiming to eliminate menstruation-associated stigma and discrimination.


In Rajasthan, India, 15-year-old Priyanka Meena sleeps outside her home, in a space cordoned off by a sari, when she has her periods. She wears the same clothes and uses the same utensils when she menstruates; these are believed to be unclean and cannot be taken into the home, even after her period is over. © UNFPA India
What is period poverty?
Period poverty describes the struggle many low-income women and girls face while trying to afford menstrual products. The term also refers to the increased economic vulnerability women and girls face due the financial burden posed by menstrual supplies. These include not only menstrual pads and tampons, but also related costs such as pain medication and underwear. 

Period poverty does not only affect women and girls in developing countries; it also affects women in wealthy, industrialized countries. 

Difficulty affording menstrual products can cause girls to stay home from school and work, with lasting consequences on their education and economic opportunities. It can also exacerbate existing vulnerabilities, pushing women and girls closer toward dangerous coping mechanisms. Studies in Kenya, for example, have shown that some schoolgirls have engaged in transactional sex to pay for menstrual products.

Period poverty is not only an economic issue, but a social and political one as well. For instance, some advocates have called for menstruation products to be taxation exempt. Such efforts in India have resulted in the elimination of tax on menstrual pads and tampons.

What are positive aspects of menstruation?
Regular menstruation can be an indication that a woman’s reproductive health is on track.

It can help women understand and, in a general way, monitor their fertility. For instance, many women regard their monthly period as an indication that they are not pregnant. (This method is not foolproof, however, since even pregnant women can experience bleeding, such as implantation bleeding). 

Some traditions offer menstruating women and girls a chance to bond with one another. In Rajasthan, India, where menstruation can restrict women’s and girls’ activities, recently married women may use it as an opportunity to visit their maternal families. Menstruation can also be an opportunity to take a break from regular responsibilities. One girl in Rajasthan, Poonam, told UNFPA that she is happy that she is not expected to help out with household chores when she is menstruating.


Girls in Rupantaran, Nepal, attend a learning session about their rights, bodies and health – including menstruation. These sessions are part of the UNFPA-UNICEF Global Programme to Accelerate Action to End Child Marriage. © UNFPA Nepal/Dhana Bahadur Lamsal
Does menstruation limit what people can do?
No. While menstruation has been used throughout history to exclude women and girls from all kinds of roles and settings, there is really nothing that menstruating people cannot do. Exercise, swimming, bathing, work and sex are all possible during menstruation. 

In some cultures, there are restrictions on what people can do during menstruation, but these are customs, beliefs and traditions and have nothing to do with people’s actual abilities. Menstruating women can – and have – competed in the Olympics, run marathons, traveled to space, held leadership roles, served as judges and held religious offices. 

However, the management of menstruation does influence what people can do; women and girls may prefer to go swimming when they have access to menstrual cups or tampons, for instance. Menstrual symptoms can also affect what people feel like doing.

What is UNFPA doing on the issue of menstrual health?
UNFPA has four broad approaches to promoting and improving menstrual health around the world.

First, UNFPA reaches women and girls directly with menstrual supplies and safe sanitation facilities. In humanitarian emergencies, for example, UNFPA distributes dignity kits, which contain disposable and reusable menstrual pads, underwear, soap and related items. (In 2017, 484,000 dignity kits were distributed in 18 countries.) UNFPA also helps to improve the safety of toilets and bathing facilities in displacement camps by working with camp officials, distributing flashlights and installing solar lights. 

UNFPA also promotes menstrual health information and skills-building. For example, some UNFPA programmes teach girls to make reusable menstrual pads. Others raise awareness about menstrual cups.

Second, UNFPA works to improve education and information about menstruation and related human rights concerns. Through its youth programmes and comprehensive sexuality education efforts, such as the Y-Peer programme, UNFPA helps both boys and girls understand that menstruation is healthy and normal. UNFPA also help raise awareness that the onset of menstruation (menarche) does not signify a physical or psychological readiness to be married or bear children. The UNFPA-UNICEF Global Programme to Accelerate Action to End Child Marriage, for instance, teaches girls and communities about reproductive health and the harms caused by child marriage. Programmes to end female genital mutilation, including the UNFPA-UNICEF Joint Programme to Eliminate FGM, raise awareness of the negative consequences the practice can have on menstrual health. 

Third, UNFPA supports national health systems, which can promote menstrual health and provide treatment to girls and women suffering from menstrual disorders. This includes promoting adolescent- and youth-friendly health services, which can help girls and young women better understand and care for their bodies. UNFPA also supports the hiring and training of health workers, particularly midwives, who can provide care for, and information about, menstrual health complaints. UNFPA also procures reproductive health commodities that can be useful for treating menstruation-related disorders. For instance, hormonal contraceptive methods can be used to treat symptoms of endometriosis and reduce excess menstrual bleeding.

Last, UNFPA is helping to gather data and evidence about menstrual health and its connection to global development – a long overlooked topic of research. For instance, UNFPA-supported surveys provide critical insight into girls’ and women’s knowledge about their menstrual cycles, health and access to sanitation facilities. And a recent UNFPA publication provides a critical overview of the menstrual health needs of women and girls in the Eastern and Southern Africa region. 


UNFPA distributes menstrual management supplies during humanitarian emergencies, often in packages of supplies called dignity kits. © UNFPA Syria/Sufian Abdulmouty
Can a person get pregnant during menstruation?
Yes. It is widely believed that intercourse during menstruation cannot result in pregnancy. However, this is not true for women and girls with shorter or irregular menstrual cycles. Non-menstrual vaginal bleeding may also be mistaken for menstruation, which can convey a false sense of security against pregnancy. The only reliable way to prevent pregnancy is to use a modern form of contraception.

Is menstruation bad for the environment?
No, menstruation in itself is not bad for the environment. However, products used to manage menstruation can have a negative impact on the environment, depending on the product and the way it is disposed.

Menstrual products such as tampons and pads often contain plastics and chemicals that are bad for the environment. The time it takes for them to degrade in a landfill is centuries longer than the lifespan of a woman. Menstrual products can also be found in bodies of water and along shorelines. The manufacturing process to produce menstrual products also has environmental consequences.

More environmentally friendly options include reusable menstrual cups as well as reusable and/or biodegradable pads. 

But in many places, alternative methods are not available or culturally acceptable. In all circumstances, the choice of menstrual product must be acceptable to the people using them. For example, some women are not comfortable with insertable products like menstrual cups. In humid environments, reusable menstrual pads may be difficult to thoroughly dry.

Given the potential environmental consequences of disposable menstrual products, it is important to expand the range of methods available to women, allowing them to make informed choices that fit their needs.

Are menstrual products bad for your health?
In general, no. However, there are possible health impacts to consider. 

Use of highly absorbent tampons has been associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS), a life-threatening condition, but these cases are rare. Frequently changing tampons greatly lowers the risk of TSS. 

People with sensitive skin may have reactions to the materials used in menstrual products, such as the fragrances used in some pads. 

In addition, many countries do not obligate manufacturers to disclose the ingredients or components of menstrual products, which could lead to women being exposed to unwanted materials. Some tampon brands, for instance, contain chemicals like dioxins. There has been little research to determine the health consequences, if any, caused by exposure to these chemicals.

How will the COVID-19 pandemic affect people's ability to manage their menstruation?
Communities around the world  are feeling the numerous and overlapping effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. These may have significant impacts on some people's ability to manage their menstruation safely and with dignity:

Gaps in provision of water and sanitation services, such as lack of sewage maintenance or disruption of water supply, will have a direct impact on people's ability to manage their menstruation.
Stock-outs and supply chain disruptions mean that communities could lose access to menstrual pads, tampons and other menstrual materials.
People who may be quarantined because they have either contracted or come into contact with someone who has contracted COVID-19 may have limited access to menstrual products or running water.
Financial stress on families who may be underemployed due to the pandemic may lead to households prioritizing other basic needs like food or household bills over menstruation supplies.
Increased prices of menstrual health supplies due to increased demand, panic-buying or disrupted supply chains may leave some without supplies, or without the supplies of their choice. 
Lack of knowledge of one's own menstruation and menarche may contribute to stress and anxiety. The pandemic may limit access to critical information related to menstrual health due to disruption of regular health services, school closures, limited access to technology and suspension of community-based programming.
In times of global crises, such as this pandemic, it is critical to ensure that menstruating people continue to have access to the facilities, products and information they need to protect their dignity, health and well-being. Decision-makers must assure these essential menstrual health  items remain available.


Culture and menstruation

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Two women dancing and menstruating. Rock art by Indigenous Australians from the Upper Yule River, Pilbara, Western Australia.[1]
There are many cultural aspects surrounding how societies view menstruation. Different cultures view menstruation in different ways. The basis of many conduct norms and communication about menstruation in western industrial societies is the belief that menstruation should remain hidden.[2] By contrast, in some indigenous hunter-gatherer societies, menstrual observances are viewed in a positive light, without any connotation of uncleanness. In most of India, menarche is celebrated as a rite of passage.[3]

A menstrual taboo is any social taboo concerned with menstruation. In some societies it involves menstruation being perceived as unclean or embarrassing, inhibiting even the mention of menstruation whether in public (in the media and advertising) or in private (among friends, in the household, or with men). Many traditional religions consider menstruation ritually unclean, although anthropologists say that the concepts 'sacred' and 'unclean' may be intimately connected.[4]

Mythology
The terms menstruation and menses are derived from the Latin: mensis, lit. 'month', which in turn is cognate with the Ancient Greek: μήνη, romanized: mēnē, lit. 'lunar month', and the roots of the English words month and moon.[5]

According to anthropologists Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb, cross-cultural study shows that while taboos about menstruation are nearly universal, and while many of these involve notions of uncleanliness (ritual impurity), numerous menstrual traditions "bespeak quite different, even opposite, purposes and meanings."[6] In some traditional societies, menstrual rituals are experienced by women as protective and empowering, offering women a space set apart from the male gaze and from unwanted sexual or domestic pressures and demands.[7] In other words, the idea of the seclusion of the menstruation hut may be perceived as banishment of the woman seen to be impure and taboo, or as a welcome space and time free of the usual daily chores: isolation versus retreat.

An instructive example is provided by the anthropologist Wynne Maggi, who spent years living in the peasant society of the Kalash people of the Chitral District in northwestern Pakistan. She describes the communal bashali (large menstrual house) as the village's 'most holy place', respected by men, and serving as women's all-female organizing centre for establishing and maintaining gender solidarity and power.[8] Also see the interview conducted in Period Matters [9] with Kalash women where they describe themselves as being 'free' to make choices, and having the opportunity to rest during their period. According to one body of cultural evolutionary scholarship, the idea that menstrual blood marks the body as periodically sacred was initially established by female coalitions in their own interests, although later, with the rise of cattle-ownership and patriarchal power, these same beliefs and taboos were harnessed by religious patriarchs to intensify women's oppression.[10]

Metaformic Theory, as proposed by cultural theorist Judy Grahn and others, places menstruation as a central organizing idea in the creation of culture[11] and the formation of humans' earliest rituals.

Synchronisation with the moon
Menstruation in synchrony with the moon is widely assumed in myths and traditions as a ritual ideal.[12][13] The idea that menstruation is—or ideally ought to be—in harmony with wider cosmic rhythms is one of the most tenacious ideas central to the myths and rituals of traditional communities across the world. One of the most thoroughgoing analyses of primitive mythology ever undertaken was that of the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, who concluded that, taken together, the indigenous myths of North and South America expressed men's worry that, unless women's periods were carefully monitored and synchronised, the universe might descend into chaos.[14]

In Aboriginal Australia, the supernatural being known as the 'Rainbow Snake' has been interpreted as, among other things, an indigenous way of conceptualising the ideal of synchronised tidal, lunar, menstrual and seasonal periodicities whose overall harmony (it is believed) confers spiritual power and fertility.[12][15][16]

To many, such cultural associations appear persuasive as, in humans, the menstrual cycle quite closely approximates the moon's 29.5-day synodic cycle, unlike in chimpanzees (~36 days) or bonobos (~40 days).[17][18][19] Statistical information from hunter gatherers is lacking, but where large-scale western studies focus on women's peak reproductive years—removing outlier values—the cycle length gravitates around 29.1–29.5 days, while the figure for women in their thirties shortens toward 28 days.[20][21] In no current human population has statistically significant lunar phase-locking been demonstrated.

Sacred and powerful

Angolan (Yombe) fetish to regulate menstruation
In some historic cultures, a menstruating woman was considered sacred and powerful,[22] with increased psychic abilities, and strong enough to heal the sick.[23] According to the Cherokee, menstrual blood was a source of feminine strength and had the power to destroy enemies.[24] In Ancient Rome, Pliny the Elder wrote that a menstruating woman who uncovers her body can scare away hailstorms, whirlwinds and lightning. If she strips naked and walks around the field, caterpillars, worms and beetles fall off the ears of corn.[25] Menstrual blood is viewed as especially dangerous to men's power.[26] In Africa, menstrual blood is used in the most powerful magic charms in order to both purify and destroy.[27] Mayan mythology explains the origin of menstruation as a punishment for violating the social rules governing marital alliance. The menstrual blood turns into snakes and insects used in black sorcery, before the Maya moon goddess is reborn from it.[28]

Where women's blood is considered sacred, the belief is that it should be ritually set apart. According to this logic, it is when sacred blood comes into contact with profane things that it becomes experienced as ritually dangerous or 'unclean'.[29] An example of this is Indian Artist Lyla FreeChild who internalised this belief and harvested her menstrual blood to paint an image inspired by a dream where she saw herself as the powerful, bleeding goddess Lajja Gauri. In an essay accompanying her art she explains her belief in the creative and healing power of menstrual blood.[9]

Menstruation and humoral medicine
Main article: Menstruation and humoral medicine
Many beliefs about menstruation in the early modern period were linked to humorism, the system of medicine introduced by Ancient Greek and Roman physicians. People believed that the human body contained four humours: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.[30] Illnesses and problems were understood as being caused by dyscrasia, or an imbalance in the four humours. Treatments for disease had the aim of restoring a balance, curing the patient. The humoral model was a continuity during the early modern period, despite the fact that new medical theories began to arise in the second half of the eighteenth century, because these new ideas which used different treatments involving new chemicals were not as trusted since they were not properly established.[31]

In this way medical and popular beliefs about menstrual problems such as irregular menstruation, amenorrhea (absence of periods whilst fertile) or dysmenorrhea (painful periods) were thought of in relation to the four humours.[32] In early modern western Europe, physicians believed that the womb could not be too cold, hot, moist or dry and that an excess in any of these could impact a woman's fertility.[33] Significantly, people believed that warmth encouraged sexual pleasure and increased the probability of conceiving a child, meaning that the womb had to be warm during intercourse. If a woman was found to be having problems menstruating which would then impact their fertility, remedies which aimed to alter the humoral state of the body were used. Aphrodisiacs were a common remedy given to women with menstrual problems, since they were believed to have internal heating effects, stimulating menstruation by redressing the constitutional balance of a womb that was too cold.[34]

Religious views
The sociological theorist Emile Durkheim argued that human religion in its entirety emerged originally in connection with menstruation. His argument was that a certain kind of action—collective ritual action—could establish simultaneously totemism, law, exogamy and kinship in addition to distinctively human language and thought. Everything began, according to Durkheim, when a flow of blood periodically ruptured relations between the sexes. 'All blood is terrible', he observed,[35] 'and all sorts of taboos are instituted to prevent contact with it'. During menstruation, females would exercise a 'type of repulsing action which keeps the other sex far from them'. This same blood was thought to run through the veins of women and animals alike, suggesting the blood's ultimate origin in 'totemic'—part-human, part-animal—ancestral beings. Once menstrual blood had been linked with the blood of the hunt, it became logically possible for a hunter to respect certain animals as if they were his kin, this being the essence of 'totemism'. Within the group's shared blood resided its 'god' or 'totem', 'from which it follows that the blood is a divine thing. When it runs out, the god is spilling over'.

Judaism
Main article: Niddah
In Judaism, a woman during menstruation is called niddah and has some restrictions. For example, the Torah prohibits sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman.[36] The ritual exclusion of niddah applies to a woman while menstruating and for about a week thereafter, until she immerses herself in a mikvah (ritual bath) and is intended only for married women. During this time, a married couple must avoid sexual intercourse and physical intimacy. Orthodox Judaism forbids women and men from touching or passing things to each other during this period.


"Laban is looking for the idols." by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo
In the Torah (Leviticus 15:19-30), a menstruating female is considered ritually unclean: "anyone who touches her will be unclean until evening" (New International Version). Touching a menstruating female, touching an object she had sat on or lain on, or having intercourse with her also makes a person ritually unclean. The extent to which these rules are observed in modern Judaism varies depending on the degree of conservatism/orthodoxy.

In Genesis 31:34-35, menstruation is referenced in a story, where Rachel was, or pretended to be in her menstrual period:

Now Rachel had taken the teraphim, and put them in the saddle of the camel, and sat upon them. And Laban felt about all the tent, but found them not. And she said to her father: 'Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise up before thee; for the manner of women is upon me.' And he searched, but found not the teraphim.

Christianity
Further information: Churching of women
Most Christian denominations do not follow any specific rituals or rules related to menstruation. Other denominations, such as those of Oriental Orthodox Christianity, follow rules similar to those laid out in the Holiness Code section of Leviticus, somewhat similar to the Jewish ritual of niddah.[37] Pope Dionysius of Alexandria held with regard to menstruating women that "not even they themselves, being faithful and pious, would dare when in this state either to approach the Holy Table or to touch the body and blood of Christ."[37] As such, Oriental Orthodox Christian women, such as those belonging to the Coptic Orthodox Church, do not attend church while they are menstruating.[37]

Some Church Fathers defended the exclusion of women from ministry based on a notion of uncleanness.[38] Others held that purity laws should be discarded as part of the Old Covenant.[39] The 4th century text Apostolic Constitutions says:

For neither lawful mixture, nor child-bearing, nor the menstrual purgation, nor nocturnal pollution, can defile the nature of a man, or separate the Holy Spirit from him. Nothing but impiety and unlawful practice can do that.[40]

Some Christian churches, including many authorities of the Eastern Orthodox Church and some parts of the Oriental Orthodox Church advise women not to receive communion during their menstrual period,[41] not because menstruation is considered to be sinful, but for more intense preparation to approach Christ and due to the physical difficulties faced by women.[41][42] This is a fairly common practice throughout Greece and Russia and other historically Orthodox Christian countries, as well as by Orthodox Christians in countries where they are in the minority, including Egypt, Kerala [citation needed] and Syria.

In 735 the Latin Church decided that women must be allowed to attend liturgies and receive Holy Communion during their menstruation.[43]

Islam
Main article: Islamic hygienical jurisprudence
See also: Menstruation in Islam, Istihadha, and Woman prayer
During menstrual periods, women are forbidden from performing prayers. Sets of rules are advised for women to follow while during menstruation. They should not fast and left over fasts of Ramadan are to be completed during other days. During menses pilgrimages are allowed; and circumambulation of the Kaaba is also permitted. They are permitted to enter the praying place of the mosque but are not allowed to pray. They are encouraged to be present at Muslim gatherings and festivals (Eids). After the period, a bath (Ghusl), which is also required of both partners after sex, is also required before prayer may continue.

And they ask you about menstruation; Say It is harm/unclean, so keep away from women during menstruation; And do not approach them until they become pure And when they have purified themselves, then come to them from where Allah has ordained for you; Indeed, Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and loves those who purify themselves. Your women are your tilth, so come to your tilth as you wish and put forth for yourselves; And fear Allah and know that you will meet Him; And give good tidings to the believers. (Al-Quran 2:222-223)

The traditional Islamic interpretation of the Qur'an forbids intercourse during a woman's menstrual period,[44] but allows for physical intimacy and other sexual acts that are not intercourse. If a man is engaged in sexual intercourse with his wife and discovers that her period has started, he must immediately withdraw.

On authority of Urwa:[45]

"A person asked me, 'Can a woman in menses serve me? And can a Junub woman come close to me?' I replied, 'All this is easy for me. All of them can serve me, and there is no harm for any other person to do the same. 'Aisha told me that she used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle while she was in her menses, and he was in Itikaf (in the mosque). He would bring his head near her in her room and she would comb his hair, while she used to be in her menses.'"

The Prophet said in Al-Bukhārī also reported in his Ṣahīh (no. 3835), "Your menstruation is not in your hand." And further, "This is a matter which Allah has ordained for all the daughters of Adam."

Some universities in strict Islamic contexts like Pakistan have become more open to helping their students during their period, and have made their institutions period friendly by installing vending machines, have quiet rooms for women to rest and considering instituting period leave as a policy.[9]

Still, within many modern contemporary Muslim communities, menstruating women are barred from fasting during Ramadhan, entering a mosque, praying and making the full pilgrimage to Mecca, despite the fact that the textual basis of these injunctions in the Quran is widely debated.[46]

Buddhism
In Buddhism (Theravada or Hinayana) menstruation is viewed as "a natural physical excretion that women have to go through on a monthly basis, nothing more or less".[47] However, in medieval Japanese Buddhism, menstruating women were often banned from visiting temples and sacred sites for their perceived impurity, primarily due to apocryphal texts such as the Blood Bowl Sutra, a prohibition which still exists in certain sites.[48][49] In the Kamakura Period, the founders of new Buddhist sects such as Hōnen, Shinran, and Nichiren did not consider menstruation as a spiritual obstacle to religious practice and allowed menstruating women into temples of their schools.[50][51] During menstruation, women should not enter temples or shrines, being seen as polluted. In Sri Lankan Buddhism, this is also true for their husbands and other men, who have been in a home with menstruating women.[52] In Bhutanese Buddhist traditions, menstruation was historically not considered impure according to the Vajrayana beliefs, in fact menstruation was considered holy and pure as a life source for enlightened beings. In Tantric Tibetan Buddhist texts the word for the vagina is 'pema' or lotus signifying the positive symbolism attached to a woman's body.[9]

Hinduism

In spite of being born to Bhudevi and Varaha, Narakasura (shown here being killed by Krishna) turned out to be evil because he was conceived when his mother was undergoing menstruation.
Hinduism's views on menstruation are diverse. Menstruation is seen as a period of purification, and women may or may not be separated from place of worship or any object pertaining to it, for the length of their period. But, in contrast to Abrahamic religions and many other cultures across the world, one will also witness Hindus celebrating menstruation in various forms like the celebration of the onset of menstruation among young girls.[53] This forms the basis of most of the cultural practices and restrictions around menstruation in Hinduism.[54] In Guwahati, India a festival is celebrated known as the Ambubasi Mela where devotees gather outside the Kamakhya Temple and fast for four days to honour the goddess Maa Kamakhya who is believed to be on her annual menstrual cycle. The temple doors are kept shut so that the goddess is not disturbed during what is believed to be the most powerful, sacred time for her. On the last day of the festival the head priest bathes the shrine of the goddess and performs rituals before opening the gates again.[9]

Sikhism
Menstruation does not lead to women being considered impure in Sikhism, and women's behavior is not restricted during the time when she is menstruating.[55]

In The Feminine Principle in the Sikh vision of the Transcendent, Nikky Guninder Kaur-Singh writes:

The denigration of the female body "expressed in many cultural and religious taboos surrounding menstruation and child-Birth" is absent in the Sikh worldview. Guru Nanak openly chides those who attribute pollution to women because of menstruation.[56]

Others
Baháʼí Faith
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Baháʼí Faith, in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas abolished all forms of ritual impurity of people and things and stressed the importance of cleanliness and spiritual purity. Menstruating women are encouraged to pray and are not required to fast; they have the (voluntary) alternative of reciting a verse instead.[57]

Jainism
In Jainism, the bleeding that occurs in menstruation is thought to kill micro-organisms in the body, making the female body exhausted, causing cramps, and producing stress.[58] Hence, women are expected to rest and not perform any religious duties for a duration of four days. In this time, the man of the house may take up the duties of the woman.

Shinto

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
In Japan, the religion of Shinto did and still does play a part in their society. The Kami, the spirits they worshiped, would not grant wishes to those who had traces of blood, dirt, or death on them. While menstruation is not entirely blood, the ancient Japanese did not know that. As a result, women who were menstruating were not allowed to visit any of the Kami shrines for the duration of their menstrual period. Even today, women are not allowed to enter Shinto shrines and temples during menstruation, and in some instances, women are completely banned from climbing the tops of sacred mountains due to their 'impurity'. Furthermore, the tradition is kept somewhat alive in the belief that the shedding of the endometrial lining is a kind of death. The tradition relates to the thought that any death in the family brings impurity and those experiencing this must wait a certain amount of time before being able to return to shrines and other holy areas.[59]

Chinese religions
In Chinese belief systems, women are not supposed to touch sacred statues, make offerings, or pray to sacred statues on their menstrual cycle. Before the revolution some temples only permitted men, and women who were very old or very young, to attend.[citation needed] Chinese views of menstruation are still deeply influenced by Confucianism values of virtue and chastity. Many women feel empowered and feminine in their early years of starting their menstrual cycles.[60]

Wicca and paganism
Menstruation is mentioned in some Wiccan and pagan texts. There are collected books and material on Witchcraft and menstruation at the Museum of Witchcraft and Magic.[61]

In the 2010s public Wiccan and pagan practitioners began sharing rituals, spells and histories of menstruation in these belief systems.[62] Pagan rituals and histories of menstruation is also discussed in books such as Penelope Shuttle and Peter Redgrove's The Wise Wound: Menstruation and Everywoman.[63]

Impact of religious views on contemporary taboos on menstruation
The views of menstruation in various religions including Judaism, Christianity and Islam are primarily responsible for the current shame, stigma and censure that surrounds menstruation and menstrual practices in many societies including Western societies like the United States and the United Kingdom.[46] Many cultures considered Western heap various restrictions on menstruating women with studies showing that secular women in countries like the United States, Great Britain, Canada and Mexico endorse many taboos, myths and negative feelings around menstruation, and which are often perpetuated by mass marketing that portrays menstruation as dirty and polluting, consequently necessitating its secretive management with sanitary products.[64] The contemporary stigma and shame surrounding menstruation is reflected in the use of euphemisms that involve shame and censure to speak about menstruation rather than addressing menstruation using simple, neutral and scientific terms as a normal biological process.[46] Judaism, Christianity and Islam constitute about 54% of the world's contemporary population such that their lessons on menstruation which are inherently rooted in patriarchal ideology have become widely accepted throughout the world.[65]

One of such dominant views of menstruation attributable to the Judeo-Christian-Islamic heritage is the view of menstruation as a curse, and in communities influenced by these three religions, the view of menstruation as a curse is conjoined with the notions of stigma and pollution. Through these notions, menstruating women and girls are ostracized as posing symbolic danger which necessitates various measures against them.[46] The view of menstruation as a curse within these religions is not only restricted to religious communities; even in the absence of religion, menstruators are still viewed with disgust and stigma, and required to verbally and spatially separate from non-menstruators.[46] Consequently, taboos around menstruation and views of menstruation as a curse and activity to be restricted spread beyond religious contexts centered around Jewish, Christian and Muslim communities to become universal and conventional expectations concerning menstruation.[46]

By region
Africa
Across the continent of Africa, a wide variety of menstruation-related customs have been recorded. In 2014 UNESCO reported that an estimated 10% of girls in Sub-Saharan Africa do not go to school while menstruating.[66][67] This is likely due to a lack of resources rather than cultural customs of exclusion, but it depends on context and country and tribe and customs.

Ghana
Religious taboos and social stigma concerning menstruation contribute to a lack of access to school for girls in Ghana. In rural areas of the country 95% of girls have reported missing school during their periods. The World Bank estimates that 11.5 million women in Ghana do not have access to adequate hygiene and sanitation.[67]

Zambia
A cloth torn from the traditional wrap (chitenge) is worn, part tied around the waist and part looped under the crotch, to catch menstrual fluid.[68] Menarche (the first menstrual cycle at puberty) is traditionally treated as a sign that the girl is probably ready for sex and marriage, as well as for adult duties in the household. Initiation rites on menarche include instruction on sex and marital relations as well as on menstrual management. This is conducted by older women. It is taboo to talk about menstruation with men, or to learn from one's own mother.[69]

South and South East Asia
In some portions of South Asia, there is a menstrual taboo, with it frequently being considered impure. Restrictions on movement, behaviour and eating are frequently placed.[70] According to a 2018 study, more than one-third of girls across South Asia do not go to school during menstruation.[70] However, there are many perspectives from across the region which show the great diversity in how menstruation is experienced depending on caste, class, socio-economic background, religion and gender. A more intersectional approach allows for a fuller appreciation of the different challenges menstruators' experiences.[9]

For instance the Christian women of the Lahore sweeper community face specific challenges around menstruation because of their gender, position as a minority in a Muslim country, their occupation with dirt, and lack of toilets in public spaces where they work.[9] In Bangladesh female factory workers in the retail garments sector experience constraints around long working hours, clean, female only toilets, disposal facilities and basic privacy.[9]

Laos
A small study in a rural area in Laos (Savannakhet) found that menstruation is considered taboo and shameful.[71]: 40  This creates difficulties in sharing knowledge at school and at home. Also, there is a low level of menstrual hygiene management. This has a negative effect on social opportunities in achieving good health, moving around freely and going to school.[71]: 40  Some menstruating women (16%) wear double-layer skirts (sinhs) while in the private sphere, compared to 54% who wear disposable pads.[71]: 28 

India
In most of India, menarche is celebrated as a positive aspect of a girl's life. For example, in Andhra Pradesh, girls who experience their menstrual period for the first time are given presents and celebrations to mark the occasion.[72] In South Indian tradition, the first period is celebrated as a rite of passage in the Ritu Kala Samskaram.

In some traditions in central and north India, girls and women face restrictive taboos relative to menstruation, such as being denied entry to the kitchen or eating meals separately from their families.[73] In areas around the Jhabua district of Madhya Pradesh, the belief is that "menstruation is a disease and not a normal biological process", and therefore women who are menstruating are not allowed to sleep on beds, enter kitchens, touch male members of their family or eat spicy foods.[74]

In a 2014 study conducted in India, the researchers found that as many as 42% of women who participated in the study did not know about sanitary pads or the anatomical origin of their menstruation. The researchers noted that women reused old rags to deal with their menstrual discharge, and that "Most of them were scared or worried on first menstruation."[73] 88% of menstruating women in rural India use alternatives to sanitary pads such as old fabric, rags, sand, ash, wood shavings, newspapers and hay.[75]

A study conducted in six villages Uttar Pradesh in 2018 found that 87% of women had no knowledge of what a period was until their first menstruation experience and most men also did not have any idea what it involved until they got married.[9]

Keddasa

Keddaso - Menstruation of Mother Earth celebration in Tulunadu, Karnataka
Keddaso (also transliterated Keddasa, and also known as Bhumi Puje, and in Tulu as keḍḍasa ಕೆಡ್ಡಸ), is popularly known as the "festival of worshipping Mother Earth" in the Tulu Nadu region of Karnataka in South India. It is believed that on this day, Bhoomi Devi undergoes menstruation and the day is celebrated holistically in Tulu Nadu. This is an important four-day festival celebrated in the closing days of the Tulu month Ponny (Gregorian month of February).[76]

Sabarimala Temple
Main article: Entry of women to Sabarimala

Women between 10 and 50 years of age were legally banned from entering Sabarimala between 1991 and 2018.
Sabarimala Temple is situated at the place of that name in Pathanamthitta District, Kerala.[77] Women of reproductive age were not permitted to worship there; the ban was said to be out of respect to the celibate nature of the deity to whom it is dedicated, Shasta, an underage teenage male.[78] A Kerala high-court judgement had legalized this interpretation, and forbade women from entering the temple since 1991.[79] In September 2018, a judgement of the Supreme Court of India ruled that all Hindu pilgrims regardless of gender can enter. The Constitution bench of the Supreme Court held that any exception placed on women because of biological differences violates the Constitution – that the ban violates the right to equality under Article 14.[80][81][82][83][84] This verdict led to protests, demonstrations and violence by millions of Ayyappa devotees (both male and female) supported by the Hindu right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party and opposed by the LDF led state government.[85] About ten women attempted to enter Sabarimala, despite threats of physical assault, but failed to reach the sanctum sanctorum.[86][87] Defying such protests, two women activists belonging to the previously barred age group associated with the ruling Communist Party of India (Marxist) finally entered the temple through the rear gate, on the early hours of 2 January 2019, with the help of police and local administration. When this alleged action was brought to the notice of the temple priests and authorities, the temple was closed for ritual purification.[88][89] Controversy regarding the implementation of this verdict continues.

Ambubachi Mela in the Kamakhya Temple

Kamakhya Puja festival
Assamese and Bengali Hindus adhering to Shaktism celebrate the menstruation of the goddess Kamakhya during the Ambubachi Mela (অম্বুবাচী), an annual fertility festival held in June, in Kamakhya Temple, Guwahati, Assam, India.[90] The temple stays closed for three days and then reopens to receive pilgrims and worshippers. It is one of the most important pilgrimage sites in India, attracting millions of visitors each year, particularly for Ambubachi Mela which draws upwards of 100,000 pilgrims per day during the four-day festival.[91] Before the temple is closed for Ambubachi, a white cloth is placed over the yoni (vulva)-shaped stone in which the goddess Kamakhya is worshipped in the temple. At the end of Ambubachi, when the temple is reopened and Ambubachi Mela is held, the assembled devotees are provided with fragments of that cloth, now reddened to signify menstrual blood. This cloth, known as Raktobostro (रक्तवस्त्र), is considered especially holy by Hindus since it has been stained by the 'menstrual blood' of Kamakhya, the Mother of the Universe.[citation needed]

Indonesia

Sign reading: "It's prohibited to enter without decent dress and for woman having menstruation", Bali, 1979
In Bali, a woman is not allowed to enter the kitchen to perform her usual duties, nor is she allowed to have sex with her husband while menstruating. She is to sleep apart from the family and has to keep her clothes that she wears while menstruating away from any clothes that she could wear to the temple. One of the most important regulations is that a woman is not allowed to attend temple while menstruating.[92] Additionally, menstruating women are restricted from cooking, having sex, entering a Hindu temple or touching certain objects that belong to men.[46]

In Sumba, women keep their cycles secret, which makes men see them as deceitful. Women from Sumba believe that because of their secrecy, they will always have control of the men. "Men will never know how much we really can do to control these things. We have all kinds of secrets, and they should always believe that we can control even more than we really can".[93]

Women are supposed to avoid intercourse while menstruating. It is believed that sexually transmitted diseases are the results of women deceiving men and having intercourse while they are menstruating. Gonorrhea translates as 'disease you get from women' in Sumba; it has become a social problem. When a man gets this disease, the only way it is believed he can rid himself of the painful sores is to pass it to a woman. The reasoning is that a woman's body can absorb infection and purge it during a cycle.[citation needed]

Nepal
Main article: Chhaupadi
Hindus in Nepal traditionally keep women isolated during menstruation; women who are menstruating are not allowed in the household for a period of three nights. This practise was banned by the Nepalese Supreme Court in 2005 but still continues.[94] Community and organizational actions exist to combat the practice.[95] In January 2019, local authorities demanded the destruction of chhaupadi huts in Bajura, the municipality in which a woman and her two young sons died in a hut. This resulted in the removal of 60 sheds, and the deployment of law enforcement to patrol for further removal.[96]

Yet, despite laws criminalizing these huts and activists calling for the same, communities still continue to use them. For these communities, these huts 'menstrual huts' are spaces for contemplation, relaxation and spiritual renewal for menstruating women.[46] In essence, the continuity of this practice demonstrates the need to consider the multiple voices and perspectives aimed at seeking effective ways to address the restrictions, and dangers, of some menstrual taboos.[46]

Sri Lanka
According to a 2018 study, two-thirds of girls in Sri Lanka received no information about menstruation before reaching puberty.[70] The lack of education leads to many girls getting sick due to being ill-informed about their bodies and menstrual cycles. In addition, at least one-third of girls missed school during their periods due to a lack of accessible toilets or pads.[97]

There is also a ritual surrounding young girls,[9] which starts with their first menstruation and ends with them receiving soft sex education. Throughout this ritual the girl can not be left alone and must always have another girl with her. If that girl must be away, she leaves an iron axe to prevent spirits from trying to influence the girl in the ritual. This part of the process continues for three months after the completion of the majority of the ritual, meaning the girl is potentially a woman before she receives any education on sex.[52]

United States
Traditionally, the Yurok in North America practiced menstrual seclusion. Yurok women used a small hut near the main house.[98] Menstruation among the Yurok of Northern California also varied by social class and status, with aristocratic women celebrating their periods with ten days of rituals that accrued prestige to them by heightening spiritual powers, while women who identified as commoners lacked the same privilege.[46] The variations of menstrual experiences as defined by power structures and local value systems demonstrates the existence of multi-layered perspectives on menstruation across various societies, and which should be recognized in the conduction of any menstruation enquiry.[46]

A survey conducted in 1981 showed that a substantial majority of U.S. adults and adolescents believed that it is socially unacceptable to discuss menstruation, especially in mixed company. Many believed that it is unacceptable to discuss menstruation even within the family.[99] Studies in the early 1980s showed that nearly all girls in the United States believed that girls should not talk about menstruation with boys, while more than one-third of girls did not believe it appropriate to discuss menstruation with their father.[100]

A 2018 survey of 1,500 women in the US showed that 60% of women feel embarrassed when they menstruate.[101]

United Kingdom
In 2017, Scottish MSP Monica Lennon began work to present an 'Ending Period Poverty' bill to government.[102] In 2019 it was officially lodged and debated in Holyrood.[103] It was approved in November 2020 and made Scotland the first country in the world to make it a legal requirement for period products to be available for free to anyone who needs them.[104]

In 2019, the Government Equalities Office launched a Period Poverty Taskforce to research and end the problem of people who cannot afford menstrual products.[105]

Society and culture
Education
Menstruation education is frequently taught in combination with sex education in the US, although one study suggests that girls would prefer their mothers to be the primary source of information about menstruation and puberty.[106] A Nigerian study showed the following breakdown in menstruation education: "parents of 56%, friends of 53%, books of 46%, teachers of 44%, internet of 45%, and health centers of 54%" held the most influence in terms of menstruation education.[106] Information about menstruation is often shared among friends and peers, which may promote a more positive outlook on puberty.[107]

The quality of menstrual education in a society determines the accuracy of people's understanding of the process.[108] This is in part due to the segregation of male and female peers during educational sessions. Failure to teach an accurate understanding of menstruation to students of all genders has social implications for gendered relationships and the objectification of women's bodies. Discomfort arises when students do not have access to the same information, reinforcing the belief "that menstruation is gross and should be kept hidden".[109] Girls are encouraged to conceal the fact that they may be menstruating in order to be considered desirable. Sexual harassment and teasing about menstruation cause girls anxiety as they must struggle to ensure that they give no sign of menstruation.[109]

Effective educational programs are essential to providing children and adolescents with clear and accurate information about menstruation. Several education and sexual health experts have studied the key features necessary for such programs. Some experts maintain that schools are an appropriate place for menstrual education to take place because they are an institution that young people attend consistently. Schools are intended to expand students' knowledge and thus serve as an appropriate site for conveying menstrual education.[110]

Other experts argue that programs led by peers or third-party agencies are more effective than those taught in the school classroom. This may be due to the use of small group interactions, the ability of these programs to target specific populations, or the possibility that many teenagers choose to participate voluntarily in these programs, rather than being mandated to attend school programs.[110]

Advertising
Menstrual product advertising began in the early twentieth century.[111] Early ads included print magazine campaigns from Tambrands Inc (Tampax), Kimberly-Clark (Kotex) and brands that have since been discontinued. Advertising for menstrual products outside the US began somewhat later.[when?] In Norway, SABA began openly advertising after the Second World War, driving a brightly colored bus around the country to provide information to consumers.[112]

Historically, menstrual product advertising has had to balance frankness and information with taboos and censorship laws against discussing or showing menstrual themes. Educational pamphlets and school outreach has been an important way of marketing to young consumers during the twentieth century.[113]

One common way that sanitary-product advertising avoids depicting menstruation is by pouring a blue, rather than red, liquid on the sanitary product to demonstrate its absorption. Historically, this has been due to strict censorship rules regarding menstrual product advertising.[114]

In 2010, the Always feminine hygiene brand created the first feminine hygiene ad to ever feature a tiny red spot, representing blood. The ad was created by intern and artist William Chyr who was working at Always' advertising agency, Leo Burnett. Originally the ad was created for the intern's personal portfolio, but then it caught the attention of the chief creative officer at Leo Burnett, and was subsequently published as an actual ad. There was some controversy when the ad was first released.[115][116] In June 2016 the presence of red blood in a UK Bodyform commercial was greeted with approval in social media for its attempt to challenge the stereotypical menstruation ad, by showing women who struggle despite bleeding from cuts, blows and bruises they receive while playing various sports.[117][118] Later, Bodyform's owner, Essity, launched campaigns featuring blood-like liquid in the campaign "Blood Normal".[119]

Advertising for menstrual products as a purveyor of menstrual stigma
While menstrual products have helped women and girls all over the world better manage their reproductive health, feminists and women's rights activists have actively critiqued the production and advertising of menstrual products arguing that they have structured menstruation as a problem to be managed, hidden and suppressed in secrecy using commercial menstrual products rather than a normal biological process.[120] Advertisements for menstrual products have actively communicated the taboos associated with menstruation by emphasizing secrecy, avoidance of embarrassment and freshness. Advertisements for menstrual products use allegories such as flowers and hearts, light colors such as blue rather than red, hence euphemistically communicating secrecy and view of menstruation as a curse to be hidden.[121] As such, advertisements for menstrual products prey on the fear of menstruating women on being discovered menstruating because discovery means stigma.[121] Consequently, menstrual products are advertised and made as to not be visible under one's clothes, or absorb all fluids and odors, be small enough to carry around unobtrusively and easy to discard without noticibility.[121] By design, this is meant to ensure that menstruating women are able to keep their menstruating status secret, and thus escape the stigma that comes with discovery.

When advertisers use words such as "fresh" and "untainted" in describing the advantages that women might gain from using their products, women consequently adopt many of the themes in the advertisements with regards to menstruation.[121] British women who were questioned about their experiences with menstruation echoed many of the themes in the advertisements reporting being self-conscious of menstruation, preferring tampons because they were less noticeable than pads, believed that menstrual blood is distasteful and finally supported the taboo against sex during menstruation.[121] Indeed, the stigma associated with menstruation does affect how women view themselves, making them feel self-conscious during menstruation and motivated to conceal their menstrual status as a consequence of the negative attitudes and stigmatized status of menstruating women.[122] As such, these advertisements and the design of menstrual products communicate the idea of menstruation as a polluting and dirty phenomenon, even among menstruating women themselves, despite the advantages that modern menstrual products offer women and girls with regards to their sexual and reproductive rights.

Visual arts
See also: Vagina and vulva in art and Feminist art
Menstrual art engages with menstrual themes, including blood, pain, menopause and menstrual stigma. Although not new in the twentieth century, a noted increase in artistic engagement began in the late 1960s, at the time of second-wave feminism, with artists including Shigeko Kubota, Carolee Schneemann, Judy Clark, Judy Chicago, Catherine Elwes, Marina Abramović, Gina Pane, Ana Mendieta, and later Orlan. Since the 1960s, artists have continued to take an interest in menstrual art.[123] Menstrual art highlights different issues regarding activism around shame, menstrual creativity, feminine power, taboos and pain.[124] Several South Asian artists including Anish Kapoor, Rah Naqvi and Lyla FreeChild have been working in different mediums such as acrylics, embroidery and menstrual blood.[9]

In 2015, artist Rupi Kaur was censored by Instagram for posting menstrual art series Period.[125] Kaur critiqued Instagram's position, writing: "Thank you Instagram for providing me with the exact response my work was created to critique.... I will not apologize for not feeding the ego and pride of misogynist society that will have my body in an underwear but not be okay with a small leak, when your pages are filled with countless photos/accounts where women ... are objectified, pornified, and treated [as] less than human".[125] She also questioned why Instagram was so keen 'to help keep the public safe from periods.[9]

Instagram later reversed their decision, and menstrual art has since flourished on the platform.

Art history has recently begun to explore this theme in art, drawing on a longer historiography of gender and the body in modern and contemporary art explored by feminist art historians, activists, feminists and academics for example Farah Ahamed.[9] , Ruth Green-Cole,[123] Camilla Mørk Røstvik,[126] Kathy Battista,[127] and Bee Hughes.[128] In 2022 through a QR code in a book, Indian classical dance was explored as a form of menstrual art, where the dancer Amna Mawaz Khan expressed the feminine power she felt during menstruation while also rejecting period shaming and patriarchy through strong, gestural movements based on traditional dance steps to raag music, and red paint on her feet.[9] This is the first time in modern times that a menstrual experience has been depicted in a South Asian dance, Raqs-e-Mahvaari.

The 2015 conference of the Society for Menstrual Cycle Research sponsored a group exhibition, curated by artist Jen Lewis, which resulted in a catalogue.[124] In 2020, Norwegian museum Telemark Kunstsenter held an exhibition about menstruation named SYKLUS.[129]

Films, TV, books
Movies and television also reflect the taboo nature of menstruation. Typically menstruation as a topic is avoided, except for scenes involving menarche, a girl's first period. For example, as Elizabeth Arveda Kissling explains in her article, "On the Rag on Screen: Menarche in Film and Television", the 1991 film My Girl contains a scene where the main character, Vada, experiences her first period. The explanation given to her by a female role model of what is happening to her is done off-camera and the subject is never mentioned again, save when Vada pushes Thomas across the porch telling him, "Don't come back for five to seven days."[130][131]

In an article for Vulture examining the history of menstruation depictions on screen, critic Tina Charisma wrote, "Periods have traditionally been used as symbols in storytelling, usually to signal a character's coming of age and often accompanied by disgust, fear, or shame. While there's nothing inherently wrong with that narrative, over time it's built a subconscious image of how menstruation should be orchestrated and perceived. Very rarely is a period portrayed as what it is like for almost everyone who experiences it — mundane."[131]

In the 1976 horror film Carrie, the title character has her first period in high school, and becomes hysterical in the gym shower believing she is dying.[131] The other girls tease her by throwing tampons and sanitary pads at her. The gym teacher tries to calm Carrie down, and eventually must explain the concept of menstruation to Carrie (because Carrie's mother had never done so). When Carrie returns home, announcing that she is a woman and inquiring why she was never told about periods, her fanatically religious mother yells at her and locks her into a closet, fearing that menstruation will bring men and the sin of sex. Later in the movie, her classmates mock her ignorance of menarche again by pouring pig's blood on her at the prom. Critics noted that the period scene "is intentionally gory, traumatic, and horrific" and mirrors the cultural "perception of menstruation as something gross and embarrassing".[131]

The 1979 novel Endless Love by Scott Spencer has a 20-page love scene in which menstrual blood is no barrier to the obsessive union of the couple.[132]

In the 1991 Japanese animated film Only Yesterday, one of the girls is found to be going through menstruation and is later teased about it, especially when a group of boys tell the others not to touch a ball she had touched by saying, "You'll catch her period".

Clueless, the 1995 cult classic teen movie, contains an oft-cited line about periods.[citation needed] Protagonist Cher, when receiving a second tardy for being late to class, uses the euphemism of "riding the crimson wave" as her reason for receiving her second tardy.[133]

In the 2007 movie Superbad, Seth discovers menstrual blood on his jeans after dancing with a woman. He reacts with disgust, as do other men in the scene. The scene has been described by critics as "[encapsulating] the attitudes of disgust and shame associated with periods."[131][134]

Netflix's Big Mouth features Jessi Glaser, played by Jessi Klein, getting her period for the first time on a school trip to the Statue of Liberty in season one episode two. As Jessi frets in the bathroom her male friend, Andrew Glouberman, played by comedian John Mulaney, finds her a menstrual product.[133]

The 2018 Bollywood comedy-drama Pad Man was inspired by the life of social activist Arunachalam Muruganantham. As a newlywed, he wishes to help his wife get better access to sanitary products after finding out that she has to live in separate quarters during her period. He works hard in order to create a low-cost pad accessible to every woman in India. His journey was chronicled by Twinkle Khanna in her fictional story The Legend of Lakshmi Prasad.[135][136]

The 2020 film Borat Subsequent Moviefilm features a scene that uses humor and irony to subvert taboos surrounding menstruation. In the scene, Borat and his daughter Tutar do a "fertility dance" at a debutante ball, and the audience is enthusiastic about the dance until Tutar lifts her dress to reveal she is menstruating, which prompts disgust and walkouts amongst the crowds. The scene was praised by writers for its satirization of common menstruation stigmas.[137] As said by Lindsay Wolf of Scary Mommy, since society has "been conditioned…to basically pretend that periods don't exist, putting them in the spotlight like [the film] did forces us to confront that 1) they happen, and 2) we need to get over it and stop treating girls like dainty little prizes who secretly have them."[137]

More realistic and accurate representations of periods onscreen have increased with the number of women in production roles in TV and film, with notable examples including films The Runaways[138] and Turning Red,[139] and the TV series Broad City,[138] Orange is the New Black,[138] I May Destroy You,[131] and Yellowjackets.[140] Yellowjackets, a series which involves a group of female characters who must learn to survive while stranded in the wilderness, received praise for not ignoring the subject of periods in comparison to other survival dramas.[140] In the fifth episode of season one, the series addresses the issue of the girls' periods and how they must improvise in the wild with makeshift pads.[140]

Though Turning Red does not explicitly address menstruation, it is used as a metaphor for a girl's coming-of-age. The film sparked controversy amongst critics who thought the topic of menstruation was inappropriate to reference in a children's movie,[139] while others disagreed and emphasized the importance of normalizing a process that is a part of growing up for girls.[141]

The essay "Menstruation in Fiction" in the 2022 book Period Matters: Menstruation in South Asia examines the male and female authorial gaze on menstruation and how more than twenty writers from different cultures have depicted it in their writing, including Philip Roth, Milan Kundera, Stephen King, and Nurudeen Farah.[9] According to the essay, male authors have tended to objectify and dehumanize their female protagonists when depicting them on their periods. In contrast, female authors such as Shashi Deshpande, Doris Lessing, Petinah Gappah and Bapsi Sidwa are shown to be more sympathetic in their portrayal of menstruation in their fiction, highlighting cultural, religious and socioeconomic constraints.[9]

Menstrual suppression
Main article: Menstrual suppression
With the recent[when?] FDA approval of menstrual suppression medications, researchers have begun to shift their focus to the attitudes of American women toward their periods. One study in particular found that 59% of the women they surveyed reported an interest in not menstruating every month. Of these, one-third said they were interested in not menstruating at all anymore.[142]

Anthropologists Lock and Nguyen (2010) have noted that the heavy medicalization of the reproductive life-stages of women in the West mimic power structures that are deemed, in other cultural practices, to function as a form of "social control".[143] Medicalization of the stages of women's lives, such as birth and menstruation, has enlivened a feminist perspective that investigates the social implications of biomedicine's practice. "[C]ultural analysis of reproduction... attempts to show how women... exhibit resistance and create dominant alternative meanings about the body and reproduction to those dominant among the medical profession."[143]

Menstrual suppression as a form of violence against disabled girls and women

While menstrual suppression has been touted as an embodiment of bodily sovereignty and autonomy among menstruating women, menstruation has emerged as a key site for discrimination and violence against women and girls with disabilities. Despite there being international laws curtailing preventing the violence and discrimination with regards to menstruation, many governments continue to sanction sterilization and other coercive responses to the menstruation of women and girls with disabilities.[144] In this case, forced sterilization is used as a means of menstrual management consequently violation the rights of these women and girls to consent to any medical procedure performed on them as well as their autonomy over their reproduction, contravening their rights guaranteed by the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).[145] As a form of menstrual control, women and girls with disabilities are subjected to various forms of sterilization including but not limited to hysterectomy, tubal ligation, and endometrial ablation.[144]

In some instances, 'less restrictive' alternatives to sterilization, particularly menstrual suppressant drugs are used and justified on the basis that they are 'temporary' and 'non-invasive' thus rendering them subject to less legal and political scrutiny. The justification of these procedures on the premise that they do not impact significantly on the autonomy and bodily integrity of the victims ignores the fact that they are non-consensual and basically a violation of these women's and girls' rights.[144] Essentially, these practices reflect the ableist narratives that women and girls with disabilities should conceal and control their menstruation in line with the menstrual stigma that surrounds menstruation and that since they are incapable of doing so without assistance, it is therefore unnecessary for others such as their caregivers to support them as they menstruate.[144]

Sterilization of disabled women and girls and other non-consensual menstrual practices are sanctioned in various regions of the world including Australia, the United States, Germany, New Zealand and France.[144]

Activism

A car in Paris with menstrual pads stuck to the windows.
Menstrual activism (also known as radical menstruation, menstrual anarchy, or menarchy) is a movement that addresses menstrual taboos.[146] Overcoming this taboo is a point of contention amongst feminists. The primary argument behind this movement is that if menstruation is normal, there is no reason why the topic should be avoided: "After a while it becomes psychologically disorienting for women to look out at a world where their reality doesn't exist."[147]

The prominent rise of menstrual activism began with the rise of feminist spiritualist menstrual activists in the late 1960s.[148] In 1973, a "Bleed In" was held by Janice Delaney, Mary Jane Lupton, and Emily Toth, who believed that their shared menstruation experience merited discussion.[148] The rise of early menstrual activism was prompted by rising cases of toxic shock syndrome due to unhygienic menstrual practices, which prompted responses feminists and menstrual activists alike. As such, a group of women gathered in Boston in the spring of 1969, calling themselves the Boston Women's Health Book Collective (BWHBC).[148] This culminated in the publishing of a manual called Women & Their Bodies, which has been adapted and currently sells today under the title of Our Bodies, Ourselves.[148] Though the manual itself rarely discussed menstruation, it opened the floodgates for an honest criticism of the way women's health is discussed. In the following decades, women's liberationists called for pushback against the status quo. A primary vehicle for these messages was through art; in 1971, Judy Chicago created "Red Flag", a photolithograph, and a year later, an interactive art installation called "Womanhouse".[148] Artistic expression transcended into national recognition, as evidenced by figures like Emily Culpepper. Culpepper released a short film in 1972 that featured menstruation images that detailed realities of having one's period.[148] The fame generated from this piece made Culpepper the figure of knowledge surrounding menstruation for laypeople, and initiated her nationwide involvement with the BWHBC.[citation needed]

The height of second-wave feminism led to landmark changes during this period, including the establishment of the Society for Menstrual Cycle Research and literature that more directly addressed the existence of menstrual stigma.[citation needed]

Menstruation can be conceptualized as a stigmatized condition that both reflects and reinforces women's perceived lower status in relation to men.[149] Feminist scholars extend this theory to explain negative attitudes towards women's bodily functions.[150] Such stigmatization occurs when menstrual blood is viewed as one of the "abominations" of the body and reflects a gendered identity among women, which leads to consequences for women's psychological and sexual well-being.[150]

Feminists such as Chella Quint have spoken against the use of shaming in advertising for feminine hygiene products.[151] She created a zine, Adventures in Menstruating, to "help alter the visibility of menstruation, so that it's at least normal to talk about it. Because, right now, it's not".[152] Other menstrual activists include Rachel Kauder Nalebuff, who published My Little Red Book; filmmaker and academic Giovanna Chesler, who created the documentary Period: The End of Menstruation; and artist Ingrid Berthon-Moine, who exhibited a video and series of photographs at the Venice Biennale.[152]

Menstruation activism has also begun to emerge in China in recent years. Starting with the outbreak of COVID-19 in China, a grassroots movement provided free sanitary pads to diverse groups of women in China and aims to remove the stigma of menstruation. Starting by donating menstrual products to female frontline health workers in Wuhan in February 2021,[153] the movement features the wider discussion sparked by the hashtag "package-free sanitary pads" on social media platform Weibo in September 2021 and reveals the unspeakable pain of period poverty to the public.[154] Following the campaign by the advocacy group Stand By Her on social media,[155] university students set up "sanitary pad help boxes" and provide free sanitary pads at over 250 campuses in China.[156]

At 16 years old, Nadya Okamoto founded the organization PERIOD, and wrote the book Period Power: a Manifesto for the Menstrual Movement.[157]

New York Congresswoman Grace Meng has been a longstanding advocate for menstrual equity, and proposed the Menstrual Equity for All Act of 2021 to Congress.[158] Many women's rights organizations have endorsed this bill, including the Alliance for Period Supplies, Plan, Girls Inc., Human Rights Watch, and I Support the Girls in addition to their various campaigns that fight for destigmatization, free menstrual products, and more.[citation needed]

Activism roles have also been taken on by young Black women like the Brown sisters, who founded the organization 601 For Period Equity in response to the "white-washed" nature of many other organizations.[159]

In India and Pakistan, grass roots activism is taking place with young people coming together to break the stigma around menstruation using art workshops, murals and street theatre. For example, in Jharkhand young people painted a mural on a wall outside a post office to raise awareness in the village, many social enterprises have been established to help increase access to refugee populations, people with disabilities and other marginalised groups.[9]

Medicine
Blood from female menstruation has been used in medicines. In Chinese Daoist alchemy, menstrual blood from females who had not had sexual intercourse was used to make a substance to prolong an individual's life, called red lead (Chinese: 红铅; pinyin: hóng qiān).[160] The substance was taken by the Ming dynasty Jiajing Emperor and the abuses inflicted on the palace women to ensure the blood's purity led to the Renyin palace rebellion.[161]

Menstrual synchrony
Main article: Menstrual synchrony
Menstrual synchrony is an alleged process whereby women who begin living together in close proximity experience their menstrual cycle onsets (the onset of menstruation or menses) becoming more synchronized together in time than when previously living apart.[162][163] A 2013 review concluded that menstrual synchrony likely does not exist.[164] In an interview with a woman who was incarcerated for many years in Pakistan, she claimed that her cycle was always in sync with her fellow inmates.[9]

Menstruation products
Main article: Feminine hygiene
Menstrual products are part of menstrual culture, as they are prominent in shops, through advertising and through disposal methods (such as sanitary bins and bags). Throughout the twentieth-century applicator tampons like Tampax (Always) and pads such as Kotex were increasingly popular in the Global North.[citation needed]


Menstrual pads
There are environmental costs of using menstruation products containing plastic and chemicals.[165] As an alternative, companies are manufacturing reusable period panties, cloth menstrual pads, menstrual cups, biodegradable sanitary napkins and other eco-friendly products.[166] Not all cultures use menstrual products, opting instead for natural materials or homemade options.[citation needed]

Gardening
Research has shown that access to sanitation and hygiene arrangements for menstruating allotment holders in the UK limits access to these spaces.[167]

Menstrual inequity

This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)
This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. (March 2022)
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. (March 2022)
The term menstrual inequity refers to the disparities in affordability, accessibility, destigmatization, and safety of menstrual products.[168] Furthermore, calls for menstrual equity expand into demands for reproductive justice, which includes the subtopics of education, support systems, and healthcare. Menstruation is a highly stigmatized biological process, to the extent that most women feel uncomfortable discussing their experiences. In the CBSN documentary "Period", New York Congresswoman Grace Meng discussed the complex feelings of shame that come with menstruation and how it contributes to gender inequality.[169]

Beyond the perpetuation of gender inequality, the inclination to hide menstruation experiences contributes to the phenomenon of period poverty. Period poverty is defined as "a lack of access to menstrual products, education, hygiene facilities, waste management, or a combination of these", according to Medical News Today.[170] In fact, 25% of women cannot purchase period products due to income limitations.[171] Furthermore, period products cannot be purchased with government subsidies like food stamps, health spending allowances, Medicaid, or health insurance.[172][173]

Socioeconomic inequity
Menstruating is an expensive process, and thus difficulty in accessing period products disproportionately impacts low-income people. Especially with laws like the tampon tax and the lack of free menstrual products in most bathrooms, many are forced to miss school or work due to lack of access.[174] One in five low-income women have reported missing work, school or similar events due to lack of access to period supplies.[175]

With regards to mental health, 68.1% of women experiencing monthly period poverty expressed that they were experiencing moderate or severe depression compared to 43.4% of women who experienced no period poverty.[176]

In 2021, 51% of female students wore period products for longer than recommended.[175] Overtime use of period products may lead to the onset of toxic shock syndrome, in addition to the chances of used pads and tampons having the ability to carry STIs.[177] In a different study with low-income women, 64% of participants explained that they could not afford menstrual products in the previous year.[178] Of these women, around one-third expressed that they resorted to other products like rags, toilet paper, and children's diapers.

The COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated these concerns in a time when unemployment and financial insecurity has risen.[175] In March 2020, the CARES Act allowed for money from health savings and flexible spending accounts to be used for the purchasing of menstrual products. Interviews with poor women in Pakistan conducted during the pandemic highlight how access to menstrual products became impossible and was not a priority and they had to resort to sharing and using rags.[9]

In 2017, the U.S. Department of Justice promised to grant every woman incarcerated in a federal prison menstrual products free of charge.[174] Yet countless women are not housed in a federal prison, and go without access to period products keeping them safe and hygienic. 54% of women in prisons do not have access to sufficient period supplies, as they are forced to spend their 75 cent per hour wages at commissaries that charge up to 5 dollars for pads and tampons.[179]

Efforts are now being made to reduce period poverty in Scotland, as it became the first country in the world to make period products free in August 2022.[180] The Period Products Act made it a legal duty for local authorities to provide free period products such as tampons and sanitary pads to "anyone who needs them."[180]

Racial inequity
Like many other health-related concerns, menstruators' experiences are influenced by their race, amongst other factors. Medical racism extends to discussions of period pain as well.

Dismissal of period pain is further implicated by the history of violence against black women, originating with slavery and continuing into its aftermath. Dr. J. Marion Sims, who is heralded as the father of obstetrics and gynecology, performed risky surgeries without anesthesia on enslaved women in order to experiment.[181] A study performed through a series of interviews highlighted that for black and Latina women, all the women in the study reported a normalization of pain by medical professionals.[182] This was not surprising to the author of the study, given that women are proven to be less likely to report their pain when they are shot down in their attempts to seek out help.[183] Women in the study expressed atypical symptoms such as 47-day-long periods, excruciating cramps, and unrelenting constipation—and still were dismissed by medical professionals. These women, up to multiple decades later, were diagnosed with severe illnesses like pituitary tumors and polycystic ovary syndrome. The denial of pain for women of color does not stop at delayed diagnoses and daily pain, and rather has larger implications for mental health. A strong case has been made by some Marxist feminists for including period leave in the work place citing pain as one of the reasons while many other feminists are against it.[9]

Negative relations and perceptions of one's uterus and uterine functions potentially may make many hesitant to call on their reproductive system in the future.[183] Especially considering high black maternal mortality rates, the connection between poor relationships with reproductive health and adverse consequences is glaring.


A CAT scan of a uterine fibroid
Fibroids are a particularly important condition to mention when discussing racial disparities in menstrual health. Uterine fibroids are significantly more likely to occur in black women, with 9 out of 10 black women being diagnosed with fibroids before the age of 50.[184] Black women also face higher rates of adverse symptoms, like extreme pain and heavy menstrual bleeding. Impacts on black women are further worsened by the fact that 42 percent of black women wait four years or more before seeking out treatment for fibroids, compared to 29 percent of white women.[185] Fibroids have immense consequences in terms of cancer risk, as black women who have fibroids have shown to be 40 percent more likely to have some form of endometrial cancer.[186] Analogously, it has been demonstrated that black women are equally as likely to have endometriosis, but are significantly less likely to be diagnosed with the disease compared to white women.[187]

All of the aforementioned health risks result in what physicians and activists alike label as "period trauma". Dr. Charis Chambers, a board certified OB/GYN, explains that "I would define period trauma as any sustained psychological, social, or emotional injury/distress related to or caused by menstruation".[188] Almost half of black school-attending women reported that they are not able to do their best on school work because of their periods.[175] Especially considering the additional systemic burdens faced by black people, missing school and becoming further behind in the system worsens phenomena like the wage gap between white and black women.

Period Talk Around the World: Cultural Practices and Taboos

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Solidarity and shared experiences across cultures
What’s “normal” when it comes to periods?
That depends on where you live. In some cultures, a girl’s first period is marked with joy or a quiet acknowledgement. In others, it’s met with silence, rules, or even exile. No two places treat menstruation the same way.

With periods, biology is only part of the story. Where someone grows up including their culture, religion, and family beliefs shapes how they experience menstruation.

This post offers snapshots of how menstruation is viewed across the globe, from celebration to restriction, stigma to solidarity. These glimpses highlight just how deeply culture shapes how we talk about, or avoid talking about, periods.

Africa: Silence, Support, or Both?

In many African communities, a girl’s first period is seen as a milestone; a sign of womanhood. In Nigeria, mothers, older sisters, or aunties often quietly explain what is happening. Sometimes there is celebration, but often there is silence. Girls are frequently told not to discuss their periods, especially around men. Growing up, it was uncommon to openly mention your period or imply it was “that time of the month.” Painful cramps were considered normal, even when severe enough to require hospital care. I only recently learned that excruciating period pain is not normal and can indicate conditions like endometriosis, as discussed earlier in this series.

Cultural restrictions are common. In some areas, menstruating girls are discouraged from cooking, entering religious spaces, or touching religious artifacts because they are considered unclean. They are often deemed clean only after a ritual bath days later. These traditions, sometimes described as acts of respect or worship, can unintentionally reinforce stigma.

Challenges around menstrual hygiene management remain significant. Lack of access to affordable and quality menstrual products, inadequate water and sanitation facilities, and persistent stigma contribute to girls missing school and women missing work. For example, in a 2025 article by the Guardian Nigeria, states many girls miss school during their periods due to these limited access to period products which can have long-term effects on their education and future opportunities.

Governments and organizations across Africa are increasingly addressing these challenges. Kenya was among the first African countries to include free sanitary pads in its education budget, and South Africa has launched programs to provide free menstrual products in some provinces’ schools through its department of women and girls. A number of Non-Profit organisations are also working to improve menstrual health education and product access across the continent.

Despite progress, many girls and women still face barriers, especially in rural and marginalized communities.

Asia: Menstruation and Religion; Rules, Rituals, and Resistance

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Sample Chhaupadi shed
Across parts of Asia, menstruation is often viewed through the lens of religious purity. In Nepal, the now-banned practice of chhaupadi (a form of menstrual taboo which prohibits women and girls from participating in normal family activities while menstruating, as they are considered "impure/unclean") forcing girls and women to sleep in isolated huts during their periods.

Although this tradition was banned in 2005 and criminalized in August 2017, it continues in some rural areas especially Western Nepal, with serious health consequences including deaths from cold, snakebites, or smoke inhalation.

In India, some religious temples still bar menstruating women from entry. Yet, there are movements challenging this silence. However, resistance is growing. The comic series Menstrupedia created by Aditi Gupta provides culturally relevant menstrual education for children and families, while documentaries like Period. End of Sentence, produced by The Pad Project are helping break taboos through storytelling bringing international attention to period stigma in rural India and highlighting the transformative impact of local pad-making initiatives..

On a policy level, the Indian government introduced the Menstrual Hygiene Scheme (MHS) in 2011 to provide subsidized sanitary pads and increase awareness on menstrual hygiene in rural schools. However, issues with supply, consistency, and infrastructure still limit its effectiveness. Across the region, civil society organizations are stepping in; delivering reusable products, running awareness campaigns, and pushing for long-term policy change.


Documentary by the Pad Project
Europe: From Shame to Policy Change

Europe may seem more open about menstruation, but stigma still lingers. A 2019 survey of 1,000 girls in the United Kingdom by Plan International UK found that 71 percent felt embarrassed when buying menstrual products, while 82 percent said they hide or conceal them.

However, meaningful policy changes are emerging. In 2020, Scotland became the first country in the world to make period products free by law, through the Period Products (Free Provision) (Scotland) Act 2021. This ensures access in educational institutions and public buildings across all local authorities.

I am fortunate to be working within a team implementing this law in a Scottish local authority, where its positive impact on people’s lives is visible every day. France, Germany and other countries are now introducing similar initiatives. For example, France has introduced free period products for students at universities and in some high schools, and in 2023 began reimbursing reusable menstrual products for young people under 25. In Germany, VAT on period supplies was cut from 19% to 7%, and universities across the country now provide free products in restrooms. Catalonia (Spain) will offer reusable menstrual products through pharmacies starting in 2024, and the EU’s VAT reforms support reduced or zero tax rates on period products to help adress period poverty.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Public dispenser of free period products in a school.
Free Period Products Dispenser
North America: More Talk, Less Access

Public conversation about menstruation in the United States and Canada has grown, thanks to social media campaigns, wellness influencers, and period-positive advocacy. A wide range of products, including tampons, menstrual cups, and period underwear, is readily available, and many openly discuss cramps, hormones, and cycle tracking.

But visibility does not guarantee access.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Limited access to period products
A mixed-methods study in St. Louis found that 64% of low-income women could not afford pads or tampons in the previous year, and 46% had to choose between menstrual products and food. Two-thirds of the 16.9 million low-income American women reported being unable to buy menstrual products at least once during the year. Prices have surged dramatically, with pad prices rising 41% and tampons 36% between 2019 and 2023. This has forced some women to stretch products or resort to unsafe homemade alternatives. Essential assistance programs like SNAP, WIC, and Medicaid do not cover period products.

Get Blessingadejoh’s stories in your inbox
Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Enter your email
Subscribe
Despite state-level efforts such as free school supplies in 28 states and DC, only one federal law provides free menstrual products in prisons. Meanwhile, over 160 bills introduced across U.S. legislatures have stalled in committees. Attempts like Rep. Grace Meng’s Menstrual Equity for All bill repeatedly fail, showing a lack of political will.

Though Canada eliminated the “tampon tax” in 2015, period products remain unaffordable for many. In 2023, a Plan International Canada survey revealed 25% of women had to choose between food or rent and period products although provincial efforts are growing. Public washrooms in Ontario and Calgary now offer free products, and BC, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island provide free products in schools. However, many are hidden behind staff-only cabinets due to persistent stigma.

This is showing that more conversation does not equate increased access. In both countries, women and girls, especially those with low income, are forced to sacrifice essentials or rely on risky substitutes. Social stigma, taxation, and policy gaps leave many without the support they need. Without stronger federal leadership and public funding, period poverty continues unchecked, and too few are paying attention.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

A range of period products; these should be available to all
South America: Private Struggles, Public Action

In many South American countries, menstruation is treated as a private matter; not necessarily shameful, but rarely discussed openly. Education about periods is often informal, passed down from older women to younger girls, which can leave gaps in knowledge and access.

Yet change is underway. In Argentina, the feminist economics group Economía Femini(s)ta has been advocating for affordable menstrual products and greater awareness of period poverty resulting in 5 bills. In Brazil, activists have pushed to provide free pads to students and prisoners, particularly after a 2021 law aimed at addressing period poverty was initially vetoed but later reinstated through public pressure.


Economía Femini(s)ta group in Argentina
Despite progress, many communities still face challenges including stigma, lack of public funding, and limited product availability, which keep menstruation a largely private and sometimes difficult experience.

Person bending in shame and stigma from having their period
Period stigma and shame
Oceania: Tradition Meets Today

In many Indigenous Australian communities, menstruation was traditionally viewed as sacred; a time for women to share knowledge about fertility, care, and cycles. These teachings were passed from one generation to the next, holding deep cultural significance.

Today, those traditions continue alongside modern challenges. Remote Indigenous communities often face limited access to clean water, adequate toilets, and affordable menstrual products. These infrastructure gaps make safe and dignified period care difficult, further deepening existing health inequities.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Dignity Vending Machine Australia
Recognizing these issues, the Australian Government announced a $12.5 million investment over four years to provide free menstrual products to women and girls in remote First Nations communities. This initiative, managed by the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO), aims to distribute pads, tampons, menstrual cups, and period underwear to address limited access and higher costs. Additionally, the Australian Capital Territory became the first jurisdiction to pass legislation mandating free period products in public venues such as schools, libraries, and community centers, alongside providing menstrual hygiene information in multiple languages. They also have an interactive locator map for people to find period products in locations near them.

While these legislative measures and programs mark progress, advocates emphasize that consistent and widespread government action is still needed to ensure menstrual equity across all regions, particularly in the most remote communities.

From Exclusion to Empowerment

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Women thriving together in dignity
So far in this blog series, we have seen that menstruation is shaped by much more than biology. Cultural beliefs, traditions, access to products, and public policy all influence how people experience their periods around the world. Some places celebrate menstruation as a rite of passage, while others enforce silence or exclusion. Many communities face practical barriers like poverty, stigma, and lack of infrastructure that make managing periods difficult and undignified.

Understanding these diverse experiences helps us see the complexity behind period stigma and poverty. It also highlights the urgent need for informed conversations, better policies, and equitable access to menstrual products and education everywhere.

Only by addressing cultural attitudes alongside material realities can we truly support menstrual dignity for all.

Reflection

Have you witnessed or experienced any cultural taboos around menstruation?

What’s Next

This is the second post in a five-part series (Periods, Spaces and Society). Read the first here. Follow along as we explore how toilets, uniforms, housing, and school design can support or limit someone's ability to manage their period with dignity in the next blog.

Thanks for reading. If this resonates with you, feel free to share or leave a comment.